process: bLIP 0001 (#884)
lightning/bolts: blips/blip-0001.md

Created: 2021-05-21
Post-History: 2021-06-30: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2021-June/003086.html
  [lightning-dev] bLIPs: A proposal for community-driven app layer and protocol extension standardization
License: CC0
```

# Abstract

bLIP stands for Bitcoin Lightning Improvement Proposal. A bLIP is a design document 
providing information to the Lightning community, or describing a new feature for 
the Lightning Network. The bLIP should provide a concise technical specification of 
the feature and a rationale for the feature. The bLIP author is responsible for 
building consensus within the community and documenting dissenting opinions.

# Copyright

This bLIP is licensed under the CC0 license.

# Rationale

As the Lightning community has grown, new features, standards, and protocols have 
been developed outside of the BOLT specification process: particularly at the 
application level that isn’t described within the core BOLT documents. This is great! 
But in the spirit of interoperability, documenting features, standards, and protocols 
in a single location with a standard format will make it easy on future adopters. 

> In particular, there are three scarce sets of identifiers used in Lightning Network

Reviewer: There's a fourth one: BOLT 4 onion failure messages (https://github.com/lightningnetwork/lightning-rfc/blob/master/04-onion-routing.md#failure-messages)

Reviewer: Good idea, these do make sense.
I'm more and more leaning towards having one bLIP to centralize all these assigned values.

Author: hmm... should application devs experimenting with BOLT 4 onion failure messages be writing bLIPs? Given that they're almost entirely used to inform pathfinding (IIUC), a proposal adding new onion failure messages strike me more as "a feature... intended to become universal or near universal" and should go through the existing BOLTs.

Happy to add `channel_update` flags and invoice's tagged fields, though I am concerned about scope creep with this initial doc... we can always add more to it if demand justifies it.

Reviewer: True, maybe we should take a more iterative approach here, and start only with things that are obviously needed by bLIPs (the ones you've currently listed) and we can add more later when (if) a future bLIP actually needs it.

Author: How about this as a compromise: I'll add a sentence about how potentially more scarce identifiers exist (e.g. BOLT4 onion failure messages, channel_update flags, and invoice tagged fields), and if/when bLIPs need them we can further specify how and where to assign/allocate those identifiers.

Reviewer: SGTM

protocol development that benefit from central organization and documentation to
avoid potential clashes:

* **Feature Bits** are used to designate that a given node supports a given feature, and 
are publicly broadcasted on the Lightning Network. Feature Bits are first introduced as
optional with *odd* bits, and when upgraded to compulsory are switched to *even* bits, 
so a new feature proposed in a bLIP should start with an *odd* bit. Feature Bits are 
assigned and specified in [Bolt

>  #9](https://github.com/lightningnetwork/lightning-rfc/blob/master/09-features.md).

Reviewer: That's not necessarily true. It's just that features can be either made `optional` or `mandatory` depending on what the node operator wants to achieve. I don't think we should have a requirement that proposals cannot use the `mandatory` bit, there are cases where it makes sense for them to do so.

Author: Makes sense. @TheBlueMatt's "if its intended to become universal or near universal, it must be a bolt" language from the #893 meeting better conveys what I was trying to here, so I will relax this language insert Matt's... somewhere :)

* **Message Types** are used to indicate how to interpret the `payload` feature of a 
Lightning message. Types `32768`-`65535` are set aside for experimental and 
application-specific messages, which are best suited to be documented in a bLIP. 
Message Types are assigned and specified in [Bolt
 #1](https://github.com/lightningnetwork/lightning-rfc/blob/master/01-messaging.md).
* **Type-Length-Values (TLVs)** are used to allow for the backwards-compatible addition 

> of new fields to existing message types. `type` determines how the contents of `value`
> should be decoded, so specifying how to actually perform that decoding is a
> great use case for a bLIP. TLVs are not assigned anywhere, but specified in [Bolt
>  #1](https://github.com/lightningnetwork/lightning-rfc/blob/master/01-messaging.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of new fields to existing message types (as described in
[Bolt #1](https://github.com/lightningnetwork/lightning-rfc/blob/master/01-messaging.md)).
bLIPs may introduce new TLV fields to existing messages,
using `type`s greater than `253`.
```

NB: I chose `253` very arbitrarily (to leave the 1-byte varints for the BOLTs), maybe we want a higher value (and we still need to specify where/how we centralize the list of such tlvs)

Author: The [only existing registry of TLV values](https://github.com/satoshisstream/satoshis.stream/blob/main/TLV_registry.md) I'm aware of start at 696969, so plenty of room to bump up from 253. I'll say "`type`s greater than `509`" and we can iterate from there :)

More focused bLIPs will tend to be more successful. If in doubt, a bLIP should be 
split into several well-focused ones.

For Lightning developers, bLIPs are a convenient way to track the progress of their 
implementation. Ideally, each implementation editor would list the bLIPs they have 
implemented. This will give end users a convenient way to know the current status of 
a given implementation or library.

# bLIP Workflow

The bLIP process begins with a new idea for Lightning. Each potential bLIP must have 
a champion -- someone who writes the bLIP using the style and format described below, 
shepherds the discussions in the appropriate forums, and attempts to build community 
consensus around the idea. The bLIP champion (a.k.a. Author) should first attempt to 
ascertain whether the idea is bLIP-able. The first step should be to search past 
discussions to see if an idea has been considered before, and if so, what issues arose 
in its progression. Such discussion generally happens on the [Lightning development 
mailing list](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/mailman/listinfo/lightning-dev), or 

> in the #lightning-dev IRC channel.

Reviewer 2: Maybe also recommend to check if feature X has been not already proposed in the BIP namespace or dlcspec namespace?

Author: good idea, added!

drafts should also be submitted by the author as pull requests.

## Transferring bLIP Ownership

It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of bLIPs to a new champion. In 
general, we'd like to retain the original author as a co-author of the transferred bLIP, 
but that's really up to the original author. A good reason to transfer ownership is 
because the original author no longer has the time or interest in updating it or 
following through with the bLIP process, or has fallen off the face of the 'net (i.e. is 
unreachable or not responding to email). A bad reason to transfer ownership is because 
you don't agree with the direction of the bLIP. We try to build consensus around a bLIP, 
but if that's not possible, you can always submit a competing bLIP.

If you are interested in assuming ownership of a bLIP, send a message asking to take over, 
addressed to both the original author and the bLIP editor. If the original author doesn't 
respond to email in a timely manner, the bLIP editor will make a unilateral decision (it's 
not like such decisions can't be reversed).

### bLIP Editors

> The current BOLT editors are the bLIP editors.

Reviewer: Maybe worth listing explicitly as this list will evolve over time?

Author: Listed explicitly, hope I'm not missing anybody 🙈

* Assign a bLIP number (generally the PR number or, if preferred by the author, the Issue # 
if there was discussion in the Issues section of this repository about this bLIP)
* Check the requested Feature Bit, Message Type, and/or TLV assignments for collisions.
* Merge the corresponding pull request
* Send a message back to the bLIP author with the next steps.

The bLIP editors are intended to fulfill administrative and editorial responsibilities. 
They do not pass judgement on bLIPs. The bLIP editors monitor bLIP changes, and update bLIP 
headers as appropriate.

## What belongs in a successful bLIP?

bLIPs should be written in Markdown format.

Each bLIP should have the following parts:

* **Preamble** -- Headers containing metadata about the bLIP (see below).
* **Abstract** -- A short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.
* **Copyright** -- The bLIP must be explicitly licensed under acceptable copyright terms (see below).
* **Specification** -- The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics 
of any new feature. The specification should be detailed enough to allow competing, 

> interoperable implementations for any of the current Lightning implementations.

Reviewer: nit: shouldn't this be included *after* the motivation and rationale?

Author: fixed and appreciated!
